>> Well, badass is the number
one word that people say to me,
you know, oh, that's badass.
Man, you're a badass, man.
That's badass.
It's like, all right, badass.
I'm not really sure
what a badass is.
I think they mean
willing to endure, like,
tough as nails kind of
thing, but instead it
comes out as badass.
It's like, whatever.
I'm badass, OK.
When they gave me my doctorate,
I still didn't have my speech
but it was time for me
to get up and make it.
So I started with the
song because if you
start with a prayer, then all
the right things will follow.
[COOL MUSIC]
So
[SINGING IN FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
But there's nothing I love
more than my homelands, which
I live far from.
I was in the hills and I
saw a coyote just wandering.
And it looked so forlorn.
And it felt like me
and my homelands,
searching for my tribe,
searching for my people
and it just seemed so sad.
So when I think about
that and I sing that song,
I can feel the wind in
Southern California.
The Santa Ana's come in and
it's like someone's turned
on a heater with a large fan.
And you're standing
in the middle
of all of your sacred plants,
all of the medicine plants
and the food plants, and
the world just walks by you
and they don't take notice.
By the world I mean the
ants, the deer, the skunks,
the coyotes.
They don't take notice.
They just-- you're
just part of the scene.
So it just makes me
feel like I'm home.
I was talking to an elder.
And we were talking
about people and what
they know about their own
selves and cultures and all.
And this old man said that--
he said that people today
are like detached seaweed.
And, I mean, I think I was told
this like 60 something years
ago, and it's still
every day in my head
that I don't want it
to be detached seaweed
and I don't want others
to be detached seaweed.
I'd say the majority of
people are lost because you're
supposed to be an independent.
Just the thought of it,
they, go West, young man,
and do good things.
And it's all about the
individual succeeding.
And then the idea of success,
that makes people lonely,
but it just separates us.
And, of course, they
never fill that thing
that you need which is really
community and one another
and relationships and a
relationship with the planet,
relationship with space,
relationship with all things.
What makes us lost is
we've lost each other.
We have been dismembered for so
long that it's time to remember.
We need to come together
in order for those memories
that we're looking for because
they're village memories
and you don't get
them individually.
We have to remember in order
to put ourselves back together
again.
And this was put
on by Keone Nunes.
And it goes all the way to--
I'm trying to see
where-- about here.
And in Hawaii and
it's called makapuu.
And the word literally
means blind, but it means--
spiritually it means one who
can see what others cannot.
I think what I see in other
people is this bright and shiny,
unadulterated light.
And that's where all my
friends and family go,
you need some filters.
It's not all light.
But that's what I see.
Even in people I really don't
like I still see that light.
Some people can only see ugly.
And maybe because I've looked
through an eye hole in my camera
since I was eight and 1/2,
nine years old but I just see
everything as
beautiful, everything.
If it's got the right lighting.
Everything's beautiful.
People are beautiful, plants.
Everything is beautiful.
Death is beautiful.
Life is beautiful.
Beauty is always right there
sitting right next to ugly,
and that's what
I've always seen.
That's what I love about people.
Like many, many natives
in the Americas,
we consider ourselves
star people.
In my opinion, our journey
is the star journey.
Yeah, all of it.
The thing that I hold
on to with the sciences
is that they say
that we are comprised
of some 90 some
percent of stardust
or we're comprised of the
same things that comprise--
that are found in space.
We are basically spaced little
water bags, flesh water bags
but the stuff that
we are made of,
you can go out and find
it anywhere in space.
So how can we be disconnected?
How can we not be a part
if we're comprised of this?
It's a lot of
ignoring of reality.
[SINGING IN FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
I do believe that
we're all one family.
The Cosmic Serpent Conference
scientist he kept saying,
you Indigenous
people hurt my head.
So I asked him, I said, well,
what planet are you from?
He said, Earth.
I said, well, so
am I. Doesn't that
make us both
indigenous to Earth?
And he said, well, yeah.
And I said, well, we
have our differences
but we are all the same people.
Now, I don't want to
have your religion,
you don't want to have
mine and that's not
what all being one is to me.
Being one is that
underneath we are all one.
My child hurts his
foot, the child
cries, I cry, we fix it up.
And if that happens on the
other side of the planet,
I don't think that anyone is
going to act any differently.
They are going to
care for that child.
How is that not being the same?
It's not like we act bizarrely
in the same instances.
We act exactly the same.
I don't have to
dance your dance,
I don't have to sing
your song in order
to be you and be a part.
Everybody's needed
in that web of life.
If we look at the path,
we do not see the sky.
We are Earth people on a
spiritual journey to the stars.
Our Earth walk is to look
within, to know who we are,
to see that we are
connected to all things.
That there is no separation,
only in the mind.